# An analytical model for cache replacement policy performance

## ABSTRACT

Due to the increasing gap between CPU and memory speed, cache performance plays an increasingly critical role in determining the overall performance of microprocessor systems. One of the important factors that a affect cache performance is the cache replacement policy. Despite the importance, current analytical cache performance models ignore the impact of cache replacement policies on cache performance. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to propose an analytical model which predicts the performance of cache replacement policies. The input to our model is a simple circular sequence profiling of each application, which requires very little storage overhead. The output of the model is the predicted miss rates of an application under different replacement policies. The model is based on probability theory and utilizes Markov processes to compute each cache access' miss probability. The model realistic assumptions and relies solely on the statistical properties of the application, without relying on heuristics or rules of thumbs. The model's run time is less than 0.1 seconds, much lower than that of trace simulations. We validate the model by comparing the predicted miss rates of seventeen Spec2000 and NAS benchmark applications against miss rates obtained by detailed execution-driven simulations, across a range of different cache sizes, associativities, and four replacement policies, and show that the model is very accurate. The model's average prediction error is 1.41%,and there are only 14 out of 952 validation points in which the prediction errors are larger than 10%.
